How to analyze Haskell performance
==================================

When a Haskell application is slow or uses too much memory,
Cabal and `GHC <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/profiling.html>`__
can help you understand why.

The main steps are to

1. let GHC insert performance measuring code into your application (or insert them
   `manually <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/profiling.html#inserting-cost-centres-by-hand>`__),
2. run the application with the right
   `runtime system (RTS) flags <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/runtime_control.html>`__
   to produce a performance report and
3. visualize and analyze that report.

The process of inserting performance measuring code and collecting performance information
is called "profiling". The work is done by GHC while Cabal only acts
as a build configuration interface and passes corresponding compiler flags to GHC.

Profiling CPU performance
-------------------------

The first step to build your application, e.g. ``my-app``, with profiling enabled, and
the second step to run it to collect a report, can be done with a few terminal commands:

.. code-block:: console

    $ cabal configure --enable-profiling --profiling-detail=late

    $ cabal build my-app
    Resolving dependencies...
    Build profile: -w ghc-9.10.1 -O1
    In order, the following will be built (use -v for more details):
     - my-package-0.1.0.0 (exe:my-app)  --enable-profiling (first run)

    $ cabal list-bin my-app
    </path/to/my-app>

    $ /path/to/my-app +RTS -pj -RTS
    <program runs and finishes>

The first ``cabal configure`` command creates a `cabal.project.local <cabal-project-file>`__ file

.. code-block:: cabal

      profiling: True
      profiling-detail: late-toplevel

that stores temporary configuration settings for further Cabal commands.
Note that while `cabal.project <cabal-project-file>`__ is intended for long-time settings
that are useful to store in Git, `cabal.project.local` is for short-lived, local experiments
(like profiling) that, in general, shouldn't be committed to Git.

These settings are used implicitly in the next ``cabal build`` command:
The first setting ``profiling: True`` tells GHC
to insert performance measuring code into your application in general,
while the profiling setting ``profiling-detail: late-toplevel`` further instructs
GHC to use so-called
`late-cost-center profiling <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/profiling.html#ghc-flag--fprof-late>`__
and insert measuring code only after important optimisations have been applied to your application code.
This reduces the performance slow-down of profiling itself and gives you more realistic measurements.
Further in-depth information on profiling with GHC and its compiler options can be found in the
`GHC profiling guide <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/profiling.html>`__

The ``cabal list-bin`` command is a convenient way to find the path to the built executable, which
is needed to run the application with the right RTS flags as in the last command:
``/path/to/my-app +RTS -pj -RTS``.

Finally, when our application run finishes,
a profiling JSON report (due to option ``-pj``) is written to a ``<app-name>.prof`` file,
i.e. ``my-app.prof``, in the current directory.
You can load this JSON report ``my-app.prof`` into a visualizer
and look for performance bottlenecks. One popular open-source
`flame graph <https://www.brendangregg.com/flamegraphs.html>`__
visualizer is
`Speedscope <https://speedscope.app>`__,
which runs in the browser and can open this JSON file directly.
See the
`Haskell Optimization Handbook <https://haskell.foundation/hs-opt-handbook.github.io>`__
on how to optimize your code based on the profiling results afterwards.

Different report formats can be generated by using different RTS flags. Some useful ones are:

- ``-p`` for a human-readable `standard report <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/profiling.html#cost-centres-and-cost-centre-stacks>`__ ``<app-name>.prof``.
- ``-pj`` for a human and machine-readable `JSON report <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/profiling.html#json-profile-format>`__ ``<app-name>.prof``
- ``-l-p`` for a machine-readable binary `"eventlog" report <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/runtime_control.html#rts-eventlog>`__ ``<app-name>.eventlog``

.. note::

    The report generated from the ``cabal configure``, ``cabal build`` etc. commands can
    also be generated with a single ``cabal run`` command:

    .. code-block:: console

          $ cabal run --enable-profiling --profiling-detail=late my-app -- +RTS -pj -RTS
          <program builds, runs and finishes>


You can also pass a lot more
`profiling compiler options <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/profiling.html#compiler-options-for-profiling>`__
to GHC via the ``ghc-prof-options`` field in your ``my-app.cabal`` file.
Add the following, recommended profiling options to your ``my-app.cabal`` file
to control where performance measuring code is inserted into your application:

::

    executable my-app
      ...
      ghc-prof-options:
        -fprof-auto
        -fno-prof-count-entries
        -fprof-auto-calls
        ...

You can find more information and further options in the
`GHC "cost-center" guide <https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/profiling.html#automatically-placing-cost-centres>`__.

Profiling your dependencies too
-------------------------------

The setup so far only profiles your main application, which is usually what you want.
This happens by default, because Cabal command line options only apply to local packages
and dependencies are usually not local.
However, the bottlenecks may be in your dependencies, so you would want to profile those too.

First, to enable ``late``-cost-center profiling of all packages/dependencies in your project,
add the following to your project’s ``cabal.project`` file:

.. code-block:: cabal

    package *
        profiling: true
        profiling-detail: late

Second, rerun your application with ``cabal run``, which also automatically rebuilds your application:

.. code-block:: console

    $ cabal run my-app -- +RTS -pj -RTS
    Resolving dependencies...
    Build profile: -w ghc-9.10.1 -O1
    In order, the following will be built (use -v for more details):
     - base64-bytestring-1.2.1.0 (lib)  --enable-profiling (requires build)
     - cryptohash-sha256-0.11.102.1 (lib)  --enable-profiling (requires build)
     ...

There's no need to pass profiling flags like ``--enable-profiling``
to the build or run commands manually this time (as seen in the build log),
because these settings are now determined via the ``cabal.project`` file.

You should now find more information in the profiling report ``my-app.prof``
to analyze. More information on how to configure Cabal options can be found in the
:ref:`Cabal options sections <package-configuration-options>`.
